---
title: "Why don’t people do things properly?"
author: ""
date: 
lastmod: 2023-06-05T16:06:00+01:00
draft: true
description: ""

subtitle: "For most of my career — make that all of it — I’ve been an autodidact. That’s a fancy way of saying that I didn’t choose my degree or…"




---

For most of my career — make that all of it — I’ve been an autodidact. That’s a fancy way of saying that I didn’t choose my degree or postgraduate training very sensibly with a view to the career I ended up having (I was a languages graduate who decided he wanted to work in technology, but didn’t know anything about it), so had to make up for lost time by learning things myself. I also found that I kept wanting to learn more things to help me break into new areas of work. As a result of this I became very keen on learning frameworks for how a particular area of work should work. Later I was able to get employers to send me on training courses and pay for exams. As a result I have various exciting qualifications that I used to display proudly on my resume.

However… it turns out that nobody actually does things the way they teach you. “Best practice” seems to be a practice more honoured in the breach than the observance. A few examples:

1: I started out as a hands-on techie. Most computer code that gets written doesn’t follow the principles and archetypes you see in the beautiful O’Reilly books I used to love reading. Instead, you see code that is overly long and complex, poorly or not at all commented, passwords or other important information hardcoded rather than split out into config files, code that is blatantly copied off some website and code that is maintained by multiple people who don’t talk to each other and so becomes incoherent, obscure and inefficient. 

My favourite exchange, when I was running a middleware platform hosting Java applications: 
> Me: your application has a memory leak, here. > Developer: I see. In that case can we please have some more memory?

2: Eventually I moved into service management. Most IT operational processes don’t work the way they teach you in ITIL training. First line incident response teams pick the easiest tickets rather than the most important ones, and close them as quickly as possible rather than when the issue is resolved. Problem tickets — to find and fix the underlying causes of incidents — go into a backlog that proliferates and eventually has to be written off, or are closed with superficial fixes that don’t prevent recurrence sooner or later. And no matter how much testing and review of changes you do, changes still go wrong and break things. Meanwhile asset records in the CMDB (configuration management database) are invariably incomplete, out of date and not properly linked to each other — so much so that market-leading service management tools include data quality reports so that you can see how bad it is.

3. I got fed up of tech deparments in banks being seen as a) executing other people’s decisions and b) a cost to be cut, so I moved into risk, which was growing rapidly after the last financial crisis. To me, risk management sounds like a way of making decisions: which risks to take and which to avoid, how to hedge your bets, how to balance upside and downside. In fact that is how traders do it. I learned all about how to make decisions by defining a risk scenario, breaking it down into factors to estimate likelihoods and impacts and quantify the resulting expected loss. Once you’ve done that you can compare it with the upside, figure out how much you can reduce the risk and whether that’s worth doing given the cost. But it turns out that in regulated companies, outside of trading and lending, nobody does it this way — it’s all about following rules. The funny thing is, they don’t follow the rules at that well. You’re supposed to have lists of risks, issues and actions and periodically update them in every GRC consultant’s favourite, the risk register. But, like assets in the IT system of record, they’re poorly defined (my favourites are so-called risks that are just topics of interest e.g. “sensitive data”, “cloud technology” or “outsourcing”), unclearly related to business objectives and out of date.

4. Guess what I did… I moved roles again! Out of risk into product management. Determined to do it right in a new area where I felt like I’d been given a big break, I learned from the best experts and trainers. Product management is an outside-in process of discovering market problems and testing your ideas about how to solve them for your target user personas. However, yet again this is not what big market-leading companies always do, to be polite. They tend to do one of two things: either keep pushing their existing product because it’s been successful in the past, or jump on the biggest bandwagons (anyone for crypto, or Web3?) without considering whether it meets an unmet need for their target market or whether it aligns with their core competencies or strategic direction.

5. Last job change story! I became a programme manager, running a set of programmes that encompassed developing new product ideas, turning them into finished products and taking them live in several markets. One of the programmes had already been running for a couple of years, so I expected certain things to be in place that you might consider not so much best practice as table stakes. Executive sponsor, objectives, success criteria, dependencies… But when I asked, nobody knew — or they all had different ideas, which comes to the same thing. They had spent two years “doing the work” without knowing what they were supposed to be doing. Apart from a lack of delivery, the team also felt demoralised as a result.

Enough stories! What’s my point? Knowing how things are supposed to get done is not enough. What’s missing is a knowledge of how people work in organisations, and how organisations work through people. In other words, systems thinking.

Traditional management thinking treats an organisation like a machine. You see this in org charts, with the implication of a change of command cascading through lines of management from the CEO down to the lowest ranks. You see it in process models where you have input, process and output. You see it in models like Six Sigma where you try to measurably make a process more efficient, you see it in KPIs that are sometimes, to drive the point home, even shown like the dials on a car dashboard or aeroplane cockpit. You see it in projects and programmes where you decide in advance what is going to happen, assign tasks to components of the machine aka people, and wait for it to happen. Please excuse my tone — I’m not dismissing this outright. For some things the machine model works well enough. Sometimes you do need a simple instruction to come from the top and everyone to follow it. Sometimes you do need to agree a date for something to be done, or what value is acceptable for a given measure. But these are limiting cases. The times when an organisation can be treated like a machine are few and far between.

So what can we do? Be aware of the different ways to look at the place you work. 

The first is just to see people as people and put yourself in their shoes to understand how they’re driven by whatever systems they’re part of. The first line support staff who pick easy tickets and close them too soon are measured and incentivised by how many tickets they close. They also don’t make a lot of money and often work thousands of miles away from the people whose issues they’re working on. So it’s not surprising that they’ll do what makes their life a bit easier and not identify too much with the impact of an issue on the person who raised it. My workaround for this: get to know as many support people as you can, as people. If that’s not practical (and in a big organisation it often isn’t) be patient, don’t vent frustration, explain the impact to you and if you think they should escalate it to someone more specialised, help them do that by explaining what you’ve already done and what you’ve ruled out.

You can see a company as an organism. Any organism, even a clever one like us, is much less centrally directed than a machine (most of what happens in your body or even your mind is not under your conscious control) and crucially it is able to adapt to its environment. As a rule, teams that are given more autonomy to decide how they work to best serve their clients tend to perform better. Of course they also need to coordinate their work with other teams, resources need to be allocated and overall goals need to be set. That requires a number of lines of communication between different parts of the organism, but always with the aim of enabling each part to do what it is there to do rather than controlling it. In the field of cybernetics, the Viable Systems Model describes the different subsystems that need to work together for each to do their job effectively. It’s not an org chart or other kind of structure, it describes flows of information to coordinate between subsystems. Most organisations don’t work like this, but can you find ways to make the part you work in or have influence over a bit more like it?

Of course, there are reasons organisations don’t work like that, to do with culture and politics. Culture is not how friendly people are, or any way in which the company describes itself (“this is a fun place to work!”) but the way things get done here. The reason “culture eats strategy for breakfast” is that any new initiative or process will be born into a world of ingrained habits. I’ve seen top execs make town hall speeches declaring war on bureaucracy, and then continue to preside over processes that require their personal approval for every initiative.
